Add supported backends docs under guides (#4)
kubestash/docs: docs/guides/volume-populator/pvc/index.md

---
title: Populate Volume of a Stand-alone PVC | KubeStash
description: An step by step guide to show how to populate volume of a stand-alone PVC
menu:
  docs_{{ .version }}:
    identifier: volume-populate-pvc
    name: Populate Volume of a Stand-alone PVC
    parent: volume-populator
    weight: 20
product_name: kubestash
menu_name: docs_{{ .version }}
section_menu_id: guides
---

# Populating a volume of a Standalone PVC

> This guide will show you how to use KubeStash to populate volume of a Stand-alone PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs). Within this guide, we will demonstrate the process of backing up a Stand-alone `PVC` and subsequently restoring it using Kubernetes native approach, facilitated by KubeStash.

Reviewer: ```
This guide will show you how to use KubeStash to populate the volumes of a Stand-alone PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC). We'll walk through backing up a Stand-alone PVC and then restoring to a new PVC in a Kubernetes-native way with KubeStash.
```

## Before You Begin

- At first, you need to have a Kubernetes cluster, and the `kubectl` command-line tool must be configured to communicate with your cluster. If you do not already have a cluster, you can create one by using [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/).
- Install `KubeStash` in your cluster following the steps [here](/docs/setup/README.md).
- You should be familiar with the following `KubeStash` concepts:
    - [BackupStorage](/docs/concepts/crds/backupstorage/index.md)
    - [BackupConfiguration](/docs/concepts/crds/backupconfiguration/index.md)
    - [BackupSession](/docs/concepts/crds/backupsession/index.md)

>     - [SnapShot](/docs/concepts/crds/snapshot/index.md)

Reviewer: [SnapShot] -> [Snapshot]

Update this in all the places.

    - [RestoreSession](/docs/concepts/crds/restoresession/index.md)
    - [RetentionPolicy](/docs/concepts/crds/retentionpolicy/index.md)

To keep everything isolated, we are going to use a separate namespace called `demo` throughout this tutorial.

```bash
$ kubectl create ns demo
namespace/demo created
```

> **Note:** YAML files used in this tutorial are stored in [docs/guides/volumes/pvc/examples](/docs/guides/volumes/pvc/examples) directory of [kubestash/docs](https://github.com/kubestash/docs) repository.

## Prepare Volume

At first, let's prepare our desired PVC. Here, we are going to create a PVC. Then, we are going to mount this PVC with a Pod. Pod will generate a sample file into that PVC.

**Create PersistentVolumeClaim:**

Below, is the YAML of the PVC that we are going to create,

```yaml
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: target-pvc
  namespace: demo
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1Gi
```

> Notice the `spec.accessModes` section. We are using `ReadWriteMany` access mode so that multiple pods can use this PVC simultaneously. Without this access mode, KubeStash will fail to backup the volume if any other pod mount it during backup.

Reviewer: `ReadWriteMany` should not be necessary. For workload backup, we schedule the backup pods in the same node. For PVC backup, we can specify the node name from the `jobTemplate`.

Let's create the PVC we have shown above,

```bash
$ kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubestash/docs/raw/{{< param "info.version" >}}/docs/guides/volume-populator/pvc/examples/target-pvc.yaml

persistentvolumeclaim/target-pvc created
```

**Deploy Workload:**

> Now, we are going to deploy a sample pod `demo-pod` that will mount `/sample/data` path of the `target-pvc`. This pod will generate a sample file named `hello.txt` with some demo data. We are going to backup the entire PVC using KubeStash that contains the sample files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we are going to deploy a sample pod `demo-pod` that will mount `/sample/data` path of the `target-pvc`. This pod will generate a sample file named `hello.txt` with some demo data inside that path.
```

Below, is the YAML of the pod that we are going to deploy,

```yaml
kind: Pod
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: demo-pod
  namespace: demo
spec:
  containers:
  - name: busybox
    image: busybox
    command: ["/bin/sh", "-c","echo 'hello from pod.' > /sample/data/hello.txt && sleep 3000"]
    volumeMounts:
    - name: my-volume
      mountPath: /sample/data
  volumes:
  - name: my-volume
    persistentVolumeClaim:
      claimName: target-pvc
```

Let's deploy the pod we have shown above,

```bash
$ kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubestash/docs/raw/{{< param "info.version" >}}/docs/guides/volume-populator/pvc/examples/demo-pod.yaml
pod/demo-pod created
```

Verify that the sample data has been generated into `/sample/data/` directory,

```bash
$ kubectl exec -n demo demo-pod -- cat /sample/data/hello.txt
hello from pod.
```

## Backup

> Now, we are going to backup the PVC `target-pvc` in a GCS bucket using KubeStash. We have to create a `Secret` with  necessary credentials and a `BackupStorage` object to use this backend. If you want to use a different backend, please read the respective backend configuration doc from [here](/docs/guides/backends/overview/index.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we are going to backup the PVC `target-pvc` to a GCS bucket using KubeStash. For this, we have to create a `Secret` with  necessary credentials and a `BackupStorage` object. If you want to use a different backend, please read the respective backend configuration doc from [here](/docs/guides/backends/overview/index.md).
```

```bash
$ echo -n '<your-project-id>' > GOOGLE_PROJECT_ID
$ cat /path/to/downloaded/sa_key_file.json > GOOGLE_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_JSON_KEY
$ kubectl create secret generic -n demo gcs-secret \
    --from-file=./GOOGLE_PROJECT_ID \
    --from-file=./GOOGLE_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_JSON_KEY
secret/gcs-secret created
```

**Create BackupStorage:**

Now, create a `BackupStorage` custom resource specifying the desired bucket, and directory inside the bucket where the backed up data will be stored.

Below is the YAML of `BackupStorage` object that we are going to create,

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.kubestash.com/v1alpha1
kind: BackupStorage
metadata:
  name: gcs-storage
  namespace: demo
spec:
  storage:
    provider: gcs
    gcs:
      bucket: kubestash-qa
      prefix: demo
      secret: gcs-secret
  usagePolicy:
    allowedNamespaces:
      from: All
  default: true 
  deletionPolicy: WipeOut
```

Let's create the `BackupStorage` object that we have shown above,

```bash
$ kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubestash/docs/raw/{{< param "info.version" >}}/docs/guides/volume-populator/pvc/examples/backupstorage.yaml
backupstorage.storage.kubestash.com/gcs-storage created
```

> Now, we are ready to backup our target volume into this backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we are ready to backup our target volume to this backend.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.kubestash.com/v1alpha1
kind: RetentionPolicy
metadata:
  name: demo-retention
  namespace: demo
spec:
  default: true
  failedSnapshots:
    last: 2
  maxRetentionPeriod: 2mo
  successfulSnapshots:
    last: 5
  usagePolicy:
    allowedNamespaces:
      from: Same
```

Notice the `spec.usagePolicy` that allows referencing the `RetentionPolicy` from all namespaces. To allow specific namespaces, we can configure it accordingly by following [RetentionPolicy usage policy]().

Let's create the `RetentionPolicy` object that we have shown above,

```bash
$ kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubestash/docs/raw/{{< param "info.version" >}}/docs/guides/volume-populator/pvc/examples/retentionpolicy.yaml
retentionpolicy.storage.kubestash.com/demo-retention created
```

## Backup

We are ready to start taking backup. Now, we have to create a `BackupConfiguration` custom resource targeting the `target-pvc` PVC that we have created earlier.

We also have to create another `Secret` with an encryption key `RESTIC_PASSWORD` for `Restic`. This secret will be used by `Restic` for both encrypting and decrypting the backup data during backup & restore.

**Create Secret:**

> Let's create a secret named `encry-secret` with the Restic password.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's create a secret named `encrypt-secret` with the Restic password.
```

> ```bash
> $ echo -n 'changeit' > RESTIC_PASSWORD
> $ kubectl create secret generic -n demo encryption-secret \
>     --from-file=./RESTIC_PASSWORD 
> secret/encryption-secret created
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
$ echo -n 'changeit' > RESTIC_PASSWORD
$ kubectl create secret generic -n demo encrypt-secret \
    --from-file=./RESTIC_PASSWORD 
secret/encrypt-secret created
```
```

**Create BackupConfiguration:**

Below is the YAML of the `BackupConfiguration` object that we are going to create,

```yaml
apiVersion: core.kubestash.com/v1alpha1
kind: BackupConfiguration
metadata:
  name: pvc-backup
  namespace: demo
spec:
  target:
    apiGroup:
    kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
    name:  target-pvc
    namespace: demo
  backends:
    - name: gcs-backend
      storageRef:
        namespace: demo
        name: gcs-storage
      retentionPolicy:
        name: demo-retention
        namespace: demo
  sessions:
    - name: frequent-backup
      sessionHistoryLimit: 3
      scheduler:
        schedule: "*/5 * * * *"
        jobTemplate:
          backoffLimit: 1
      repositories:
        - name: gcs-repository
          backend: gcs-backend
          directory: /pvc-backup-demo
          encryptionSecret:

>             name: encryption-secret

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            name: encrypt-secret
```

```

**Verify Backup Setup Successful**

If everything goes well, the phase of the `BackupConfiguration` should be in `Ready` state. The `Ready` phase indicates that the backup setup is successful. Let's check the `Phase` of the BackupConfiguration,

```bash
$ kubectl get backupconfiguration -n demo
NAME             PHASE   PAUSED   AGE
pvc-backup       Ready            19s
```

**Verify Repository:**

Verify that KubeStash has created `Repositories` that holds the `BackupStorage` information by the following command,

```bash
$ kubectl get repositories -n demo
NAME             INTEGRITY   SNAPSHOT-COUNT   SIZE   PHASE   LAST-SUCCESSFUL-BACKUP   AGE
gcs-repository                                       Ready                            28s
```

**Verify CronJob:**

Verify that KubeStash has created a CronJob to trigger a periodic backup of the targeted PVC by the following command,

```bash
$ kubectl get cronjob -n demo
NAME                                     SCHEDULE      SUSPEND   ACTIVE   LAST SCHEDULE   AGE
trigger-pvc-backup-frequent-backup       */5 * * * *   False     0        5s              40s
```

**Wait for BackupSession:**

> Now, wait for the next backup schedule. You can watch for `BackupSession` crd using the following command,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, wait for the next backup schedule. You can watch for `BackupSession` CR using the following command,
```

```bash
$ watch -n 1 kubectl get backupsession -n demo -l=kubestash.com/invoker-name=pvc-backup

Every 1.0s: kubectl get backupsession -n demo -l=kubestash.com/invoker-name=pvc-backup                                                                                           workstation: Wed Jan  3 17:26:00 2024

NAME                                        INVOKER-TYPE          INVOKER-NAME     PHASE       DURATION   AGE
pvc-backup-frequent-backup-1704281100       BackupConfiguration   nfs-pvc-backup   Succeeded              60s

```

**Verify Backup:**

> When backup session is complete, KubeStash will update the respective `Repository` to reflect the latest state of backed up data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When backup is complete, KubeStash will update the respective `Repository` to reflect the latest state of backed up data.
```

```bash
$ kubectl get repositories -n demo
NAME             INTEGRITY   SNAPSHOT-COUNT   SIZE        PHASE   LAST-SUCCESSFUL-BACKUP   AGE
gcs-repository   true        1                2.262 KiB   Ready   103s                     8m

```

> At this moment we have one `Snapshot`. Run the following command to check the respective `Snapshot` which represents the state of a backup run to a particular `Repository`.
> 
> Verify created `Snapshot` object by the following command,
> 
> ```bash
> $ kubectl get snapshots -n demo
> NAME                                                       REPOSITORY       SESSION           SNAPSHOT-TIME          DELETION-POLICY   PHASE       VERIFICATION-STATUS   AGE
> gcs-repository-pvc-backup-frequent-backup-1704281100       gcs-repository   frequent-backup   2024-01-03T11:25:13Z   Delete            Succeeded                         2m14s
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this moment we have one `Snapshot`. Run the following command to check the respective `Snapshot`,

```bash
$ kubectl get snapshots -n demo
NAME                                                       REPOSITORY       SESSION           SNAPSHOT-TIME          DELETION-POLICY   PHASE       VERIFICATION-STATUS   AGE
gcs-repository-pvc-backup-frequent-backup-1704281100       gcs-repository   frequent-backup   2024-01-03T11:25:13Z   Delete            Succeeded                         2m14s
```
Refer to the snapshot YAML for detailed backup information.
```

> 

Reviewer: you can show the Snapshot yaml here.

> > When a backup is triggered according to schedule, KubeStash will create a `Snapshot` with the following labels  `kubestash.com/app-ref-kind: PersistentVolumeClaim`, `kubestash.com/app-ref-name: <volume-name>`, `kubestash.com/app-ref-namespace: <volume-namespace>` and `kubestash.com/repo-name: <repository-name>`. We can use these labels to watch only the `Snapshot` of our desired Workload or `Repository`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> When a backup is triggered according to schedule, KubeStash will create a `Snapshot` with the following labels  `kubestash.com/app-ref-kind: PersistentVolumeClaim`, `kubestash.com/app-ref-name: <pvc-name>`, `kubestash.com/app-ref-namespace: <pvc-namespace>` and `kubestash.com/repo-name: <repository-name>`. We can use these labels to watch only the `Snapshot` of our desired Workload or `Repository`.
```

## Populate Volume

> This section will show you through the process of populating a volume by restoring the previously backed-up data using KubeStash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section will show you how to populate a volume with data from the Snapshot of the previous backup using KubeStash.
```

**Create a Stand-alone PVC:**

> Now, we are going to create a stand-alone `PVC` with `spec.dataSourceRef` set and refers our `snapshot` object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we are going to create a stand-alone `PVC` with `spec.dataSourceRef` pointing to our Snapshot object.
```

```yaml
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: populate-pv
  namespace: demo
spec:
  accessModes:
  - ReadWriteMany
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1Gi
  dataSourceRef:
    apiGroup: storage.kubestash.com
    kind: Snapshot
    name: gcs-repository-nfs-pvc-backup-frequent-backup-1704281100
```
Here,

>   - `spec.dataSourceRef` specifies that which `snapshot` we want to restore into our populate volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `spec.dataSourceRef` specifies that which `Snapshot` we want to use for restoring and populating the volume.
```

>   - we are referencing a `snapshot` object that we have backed up in the previous section.

Reviewer: this lin
```suggestion
  - We have referenced the `Snapshot` object that was backed up in the previous section.
```

Let's create the `PVC` object that we have shown above,

```bash
$ kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubestash/docs/raw/{{< param "info.version" >}}/docs/guides/volume-populator/pvc/examples/populate-pv.yaml
persistentvolumeclaim/populate-pv created
```

**Wait for Populate Volume:**

> When you create a `PVC` with `spec.dataSourceRef` set and refers our `snapshot` object, KubeStash will create a restore Job. Now, wait for the volume populate process to complete. 

Reviewer: When you create a PVC using spec.dataSourceRef that refers to our `Snapshot` object, KubeStash automatically creates a populator Job. Now, just wait for the volume population process to finish.

You can watch the `PVC` status using the following command,

```bash
$ watch -n 1 kubectl get pvc -n demo populate-pv

Every 1.0s: kubectl get pvc -n demo populate-pv                                workstation: Wed Jan  3 17:30:20 2024

NAME                STATUS   VOLUME                                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS   AGE
populate-pv         Bound    pvc-8d509c47-c26e-4039-8c03-49b25d126429   2Gi        RWO            standard       5d1
```

> From the output of the above command, we can see that `PVC` status is `Bound` that means populate volume has been completed successfully.

Reviewer: The output of the command shows the PVC status as Bound, indicating successful completion of the volume population.

**Verify Restored Data :**

> We are going to create a new `Pod` with mounting our previously created PVC `populate-pv` to verify whether the volume population has been restored successfully or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are going to create a new `Pod` with mounting our previously created PVC `populate-pv` to verify whether the restored data.
```

Below, the YAML of the `Pod` that we are going to create,

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: restored-pod
  namespace: demo
spec:
  containers:
  - name: busybox
    image: busybox
    args:
    - sleep
    - "3600"
    volumeMounts:
    - name: restore-data
      mountPath: /restore/data
  volumes:
  - name: restore-data
    persistentVolumeClaim:
      claimName: populate-pv
      readOnly: false
```
Let's create the Pod we have shown above.

```bash
$ kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubestash/docs/raw/{{< param "info.version" >}}/docs/guides/volume-populator/pvc/examples/restored-pod.yaml
pod/restored-pod created
```

Now, wait for the `Pod` to go into the `Running` state.

```bash
$ kubectl get pod -n demo 
NAME           READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
restored-pod   1/1     Running   0          25s
```

Verify that the backed up data has been restored in `/restore/data` directory for `restored-pod` pod using the following command,

```bash
$ kubectl exec -n demo restored-pod -- cat /restore/data/hello.txt
hello from pod.
```

> 

Reviewer: Apply the same changes everywhere they are relevant.
